# gNMI-3: union_replace

## Summary

The tests defined here will cover the basic operation of `union_replace` to
add, remove and change configuration and the scenarios defined in [gNMI
union_replace section
5.3](https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/gnmi-union_replace.md#53-union-behavior-options).
The goal is to catch bugs related to add/remove/change actions and avoid the
complexity of attempting to test all combinations of features and their
configuration items.

In depth configuration scenarios for the full landscape of configuration data
will not be covered in tests of the union_replace feature.  Instead, in depth
configuration will be covered within the tests for the given feature. For
example, detailed coverage of BGP configuration with OC and CLI will be covered
in the [featureprofiles BGP feature
folder](https://github.com/openconfig/featureprofiles/tree/main/feature/bgp).

### Baseline DUT management configuration

`union_replace` causes the entire device configuration to be overwritten.  This
is a problem for featureprofiles because there is an assumption that a
“baseline configuration” is present on the DUT, allowing its management
interface(s) to be reachable to the ondatra test runner. This baseline
configuration varies per environment and is not specified by the
featureprofiles code.  A featureprpfiles test with `union_replace` must have or
gain knowledge of the “baseline configuration” so it can be safely replaced
without disrupting management connectivity.

This test uses ssh to to obtain the baseline configuration in CLI format and
merge that with the union_replace configuration generated by the test.

## gNMI-3.1 - Idempotent configuration

Verify the same configuration as already on the device can be pushed and
accepted without changing the configuration.

Steps

* Get baseline configuration
* Push configuration baseline + A to the DUT
* Get configuration A.1
* Verify A.1 == baseline + A
* Push configuration baseline + A to the DUT (a second time)
* Get configuration A.1
* Verify A.1 == baseline + A

## gNMI-3.2 - union_replace add configuration

Generate a configuration for interface MTU and add that to the baseline
configuration using union_replace.

## gnmi-3.2.1 - Add an interface using OC to the baseline configuration

Steps

* Get the baseline configuration (A).
* Generate a configuration with a new interface using OC (A.1).
* Push configuration A + A.1 to the DUT.
* Get configuration as A.2
* Verify A.2 == A + A.1

## gnmi-3.2.2 - add the interface configuration using CLI

Repeat steps in gnmi-3.2.1 but use CLI for the added interface configuration.

## gNMI-3.3 - union_replace change configuration

### gnmi-3.3.1 Change the interface description using OC

Steps

* Get baseline configuration (B).
* Change the description of an interface using OC. (B.1)
* Push configuration baseline + B.1 to the DUT.
* Get configuration as B.2
* Verify B.2 == B + B.1

### gnmi-3.3.2 - repeat gnmi-3.3.1 but change only the interface description using CLI

## gNMI-3.4 - union_replace delete configuration through omission

### gnmi-3.4.1 - Remove the interface ip address by omitting it in OC.

Steps

* Get baseline configuration (B).
* Generate OC configuration adding interfaces 1 and 2 (B.1).
* Push configuration baseline + B.1 to the DUT.
* Get configuration as B.2
* Verify B.2 == B + B.1
* Generate OC configuration adding only interface 1 (B.3).
* Push configuration baseline + B.3 to the DUT.
* Get configuration as B.4
* Verify B.4 == B + B.3

### gnmi-3.4.2 - repeat gnmi 3.4.1 but instead remove the interface ip address by omitting it in CLI.

## gNMI-3.5 - union_replace move configuration

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

In some scenarios it is observed that moving a configuration from one interface
to another can trigger bugs. Particularly if there is some conflicting element
in the configuration such as an IP address.  This test moves a an IP address
from interface 1 to interface 2 using union replace.

### gnmi-3.5.1 move IP address between interfaces using OC

Steps

* Get baseline configuration (C).
* Generate OC configuration with IP address 192.168.0.1 to DUT port 1 (C.1).
* Push configuration baseline + C.1 to the DUT.
* Verify port 1 IP address is as expected
* Generate OC config with IP address 192.168.0.1 to DUT port 2 (C.2).
* Push configuration baseline + C.2 to the DUT.
* Verify port 1 IP address is no longer configured
* Verify port 2 IP address is configured to be 192.168.0.1

### gnmi-3.5.2 move IP address between interfaces using CLI

Steps

* Get baseline configuration (C).
* Generate CLI configuration with IP address 192.168.0.1 to DUT port 1 (C.1).
* Push configuration baseline + C.1 to the DUT.
* Verify port 1 IP address is as expected
* Generate CLI config with IP address 192.168.0.1 to DUT port 2 (C.2).
* Push configuration baseline + C.2 to the DUT.
* Verify port 1 IP address is no longer configured
* Verify port 2 IP address is configured to be 192.168.0.1

## gNMI-3.6 - union_replace accepted with hardware mismatch

Interface configurations containing a mismatch with hardware (for example, due
to a missing or incompatible transceiver module) must be accepted by a device.
The interface with the mismatched configuration is expected to be in a down
operational state as the result of such a configuration commit.

Steps

* Get configuration D.1 from DUT
* Generate a configuration D.2 with a port-speed mismatch in the OC which
  should be accepted by the device
* Push the configuration to the DUT
* Verify the gnmi.Set is accepted
* Get configuration D.3
* Verify  D.2 == D.3.  That is, verify only the interface speed is changed
  between D.1 and D.3.  The remaining CLI and all OC must be unchanged.

### gnmi3.6.1  verify configuration with OC hardware mismatch is accepted

Generate a configuration D.2 with a port-speed mismatch in the OC which should
be accepted and applied by the DUT.

### gnmi3.6.2  verify configuration with CLI hardware mismatch is accepted

Generate a configuration D.2 with a port-speed mismatch in the CLI which should
be accepted and applied by the DUT.

## gNMI-3.7 - union_replace rejected with error in CLI with OC

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

Verify a DUT rejects and rolls back a gnmi.Set union_replace with an invalid
configuration in origin CLI.  Verify the original configuration is preserved.

TODO: Decide what configuration error(s) to use.  I think we need cases where
there is OC that fails leafref validation, but even more importantly, a
scenario where the OC will validate, but contains a semantic error.

Simple issues like a value out of range or referencing a policy that doesn’t
exist in the OC case will be caught with a validation of the structs.  Such an
error  is likely a different code path in a DUT vs. processing a configuration
that validates but has some semantic error.

For example of a config that fails validation: referencing a BGP policy that
doesn’t exist is an example of data that won’t validate, since BGP policy
references in OC are defined as leafrefs.  We can write that test and send an
unvalidated config to a DUT, but it seems unlikely to reveal bugs.

For the case where the config passes validation but contains a semantic error,
a test case could be configuring an interface to use a QoS queue that doesn’t
exist.  In this case, the queue name is a string, not a leafref.  See
qos/interfaces/interface/input/queues/queue/config/name.    (I think this leaf
is a string and not a leafref because a device may expose queues which are not
explicitly configured)

Steps

* Get configuration E.1 from DUT.
* Generate a configuration E.2  which includes invalid configuration (see sub
  tests).
* Push the configuration E.1 + E.2 to the DUT.
* Confirm the DUT rejects the gnmi.Set.
* Get configuration E.3 from DUT.
* Verify E.1 == E.3  (the configuration is unchanged).

### gnmi-3.7.1 reference validation error in OC

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

The invalid configuration is OC which references a BGP neighbor import policy
that does not exist.

### gnmi-3.7.2 reference which validates but is an error in OC

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

The invalid configuration is OC which references an qos queue on an interface
which does not exist.

### gnmi-3.7.3 reference error in CLI

The invalid configuration is CLI which references a BGP neighbor import policy
that does not exist.

## gNMI-3.8 - union_replace rejected with error due to configuration item overlap

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

This test verifies union_replace option 1 or 2 behavior for resolving
overlapping configuration items between OC and CLI.  Generate the following
configuration item combinations which have overlaps between CLI and OC.  For
NOS which implement option 1, the DUT should return a gRPC error of
`INVALID_ARGUMENT`.  For NOS with implement option 2, the configuration should
be accepted, with the CLI value taking effect and the OC configuration leaf
being accepted, but not applied as “state”.

* Get baseline configuration E.1 from DUT.
* Generate a configuration E.2  which includes the overlapping configuration.
* Push the configuration E.1 + E.2 to the DUT.
* Confirm the DUT rejects the gnmi.Set with a gRPC error code of
  `INVALID_ARGUMENT`. Log the contents of the optional gRPC error string.
* Get configuration E.3 from DUT.
* Verify the configuration is as expected
  * For option 1 NOS, verify E.1 == E.3  (the configuration is unchanged).
  * For option 2 NOS, verify E.2 == E.3 (the CLI config is updated, the OC
    state is updated to match the CLI value, the OC config is updated using the
    OC value.  Note that the OC state leaves do not equal the OC config leaves)

### gnmi-3.8.1 interface CLI and OC overlap with different values

Test where the configuration overlap is the interface MTU with two different
MTU values.

### gnmi-3.8.2 interface CLI and OC overlap with same value

   Test where the configuration overlap is the interface MTU with the same MTU
   values.

### gnmi-3.8.3 BGP model overlap

Test where the configuration overlap is
/network-instances/network-instance/protocols/protocol/bgp/global/config/as

### gnmi-3.8.4 routing-policy model overlap

Test where the overlap is
/routing-policy/policy-definitions/policy-definition/config/name.

## gNMI-3.9 CLI and OC non-overlap in same OC configuration tree

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

These configurations should be accepted and applied successfully by the DUT.

### gnmi-3.9.1 interface and MTU in OC and interface description in CLI

Steps

* Get configuration D.1 from DUT
* Generate a configuration D.2 with one interface description set in CLI and a
  second set using  OC.
* Push the configuration to the DUT
* Verify the gnmi.Set is accepted
* Get configuration D.3
* Verify OC configuration for interface one and two match the descriptions
  provided by the CLI and OC respectively.

## gNMI-3.10 - union_replace accepted with missing hardware

TODO: implement this test in a future pull request

Configure an interface with a missing transceiver module.  The interface with
the missing transceiver is expected to contain “config” leaves with the desired
values. The “state” leaves should show a down operational state as the result
of the configuration commit.

Steps

* Identify an interface without a transceiver module installed.
* Get configuration D.1 from DUT
* Generate a configuration D.2 , including a port-speed and breakout mode for
the interface without a transceiver.
* Push the configuration to the DUT Verify the gnmi.Set is accepted
* Get configuration D.3
* Verify  D.2 == D.3 configuration.  That is, verify the “config” leaves for
breakout mode and port speed are set to the target values.
* Verify the state for the interface is oper-state DOWN.
* Verify all other CLI and OC config leaves are unchanged.

## gnmi3.10.1  verify configuration with OC hardware missing is accepted

Perform the steps where a configuration D.2 where the port-speed and breakout
set using OC.

### gnmi3.10.2  verify configuration with CLI hardware missing is accepted

Perform the steps where a configuration D.2 where the port-speed and breakout
set using CLI.

## Canonical OC

```json
{
  "components": {
    "component": [
      {
        "config": {
          "name": "Port0"
        },
        "name": "Port0",
        "port": {
          "breakout-mode": {
            "groups": {
              "group": [
                {
                  "config": {
                    "breakout-speed": "SPEED_50GB",
                    "index": 1,
                    "num-breakouts": 2,
                    "num-physical-channels": 2
                  },
                  "index": 1
                }
              ]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      {
        "config": {
          "name": "Port0-Transceiver"
        },
        "name": "Port0-Transceiver",
        "state": {
          "parent": "Port0",
          "type": "TRANSCEIVER"
        },
        "transceiver": {
          "state": {
            "form-factor": "QSFP28"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  },
  "interfaces": {
    "interface": [
      {
        "config": {
          "description": "First 50G breakout",
          "mtu": 1500,
          "name": "eth0/0"
        },
        "ethernet": {
          "config": {
            "port-speed": "SPEED_50GB"
          }
        },
        "name": "eth0/0"
      },
      {
        "config": {
          "description": "Second 50G breakout with wrong port-speed",
          "name": "eth0/1"
        },
        "ethernet": {
          "config": {
            "port-speed": "SPEED_100GB"
          }
        },
        "name": "eth0/1"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## OpenConfig Path and RPC Coverage

```yaml
paths:
  ## Config Paths ##
  /interfaces/interface/config/mtu:
  /interfaces/interface/ethernet/config/port-speed:

  ## State Paths ##
  /interfaces/interface/state/mtu:
  /interfaces/interface/state/oper-status:
  /interfaces/interface/ethernet/state/port-speed:

rpcs:
  gnmi:
    gNMI.Subscribe:
    gNMI.Set:
```

